---
layout: post
title: 'Mocking the Bracket'
date: '2015-03-15 13:00:00 -0500'
basename: mocking_the_bracket
---
**Click [here](#latest) for the latest update.**

Each year for the better part of the last decade, the NCAA has invited a group of media
and other folks to Indianapolis to participate in a mock selection committee
meeting and report the details of the sausage factory to the masses.

And each year, there is still much public confusion about the process,
despite the NCAA's best efforts (and pretty thorough description of the
[process](http://i.turner.ncaa.com/dr/ncaa/ncaa7/release/sites/default/files/images/2015/02/16/2014-15_principles_and_procedures.pdf)).
Yes, they leave some parts of the procedure open to interpretation
(How do they define "best teams" for at-large selection? Is a team's "natural
area of interest" the closest absolute site, or their most sensible geographic
region?), but the process itself is well defined.

While the [selection](http://crashingthedance.com/selection) and
[seeding](http://crashingthedance.com/seeding) steps that Crashing the Dance
tries to forecast using machine learning are highly subjective, the bracketing
step is essentially an algorithm based on the 1-68 seed list and the bracketing
rules and principles.

So, I'm going to once again do my part to help y'all understand, as much as I
understand it anyway, how the committee does its job when taking the 1-68 list
and placing each team into the bracket.

First, let's identify which teams are prohibited from certain sites based on
committee criteria.

> A team will not be permitted to play in any facility in which it has played
> more than three games during its season, not including exhibitions and
> conference post-season tournaments.

> A host institution’s team shall not be permitted to play at the site where the
> institution is hosting. However, the team may play on the same days when the
> institution is hosting.

In addition to those criteria, BYU does not play on Sunday for religious
reasons, so they cannot be assigned to a pod or region with Sunday games
scheduled.

<a name='pod-prohibitions'></a>

Pod site prohibitions (not comprehensive)
-----------------------------------------
**Jacksonville** - Jacksonville

**Louisville** - Louisville

**Pittsburgh** - Duquesne

**Portland** - Oregon

**Charlotte** - UNC-Charlotte, BYU

**Columbus** - Ohio State, BYU

**Omaha** - Creighton, BYU

**Seattle** - Washington, BYU

<a name='region-prohibitions'></a>

Region site prohibitions (not comprehensive)
-----------------------------------------
**Cleveland** - Cleveland State

**Los Angeles** - Pepperdine

**Houston** - Rice, Houston, BYU

**Syracuse** - BYU

Remember, this is not my opinion of how the bracket will look at 6 p.m. on
Selection Sunday. It is an exercise in placing teams in the bracket based on the
latest 1-68 seed list generated by the CTD seeding model (as of 1 p.m. ET Sunday).

> The committee will place the four No. 1 seeded teams 1 through 4 in each of
> the four regions, thus determining the Final Four semifinals pairings (overall
> 1 vs. 4; 2 vs. 3).

The main principle when placing teams into the bracket is:

> Teams will remain in or as close to their areas of natural interest as
> possible. A team moved out of its natural area will be placed in the next
> closest region to the extent possible. If two teams from the same natural
> region are in contention for the same bracket position, the team ranked higher
> in the seed list shall remain in its natural region.

There is some debate over what a team's "natural region" is for the purposes of
bracketing the field. It is generally a balance between distance to each site,
"fit" (Kentucky was sent to Atlanta over closer St. Louis in 2012 because it was
[deemed a better fit](http://espn.go.com/mens-college-basketball/tournament/2012/story/_/id/7674260/men-ncaa-tournament-2012-selection-committee-did-best-keep-teams-home)), and other factors. We'll consider each application as it comes up. 

As usual, I'll be using the super handy
[CTD distance chart](http://crashingthedance.com/distance) to find the closest site.
Regardless of how the criteria is applied, the NCAA has made very clear that
geography trumps just about everything when it comes to building the bracket.

So, without further ado, let's get started. And it's a pretty easy start.

**1. Kentucky - Midwest (Cleveland)**

It is no surprise that Kentucky is the overall #1 seed, and it is no surprise
that the Wildcats are sent to the nearest region. Next.

**2. Villanova - East (Syracuse)**

The other Wildcats are also pretty easy to slot into their natural and closest
region.

**3. Wisconsin - South (Houston)**

While better than being placed as the #2 in Kentucky's region, the Badgers would
have to travel a little more than they'd prefer. Cleveland and Syracuse are each
closer to Madison, but they're already taken. Houston it is.

**4. Virginia - West (Los Angeles)**

The gap between the Cavs and Duke is so razor thin that they keep flip flopping
back and forth in the 4 and 5 spots. Not that they get a say in the matter,
but Virginia would probably prefer traveling West for the regional than having
to be the 2 seed in Kentucky's bracket. Los Angeles is obviously farther from
Charlottesville than the other three sites, but Hollywood is the only option.

Now that we're done with the #1 seeds, there are a few other rules that start
coming into play.

> Each of the first four teams selected from a conference shall be placed in different
regions if they are seeded on the first four lines.

**5. Arizona - West (Los Angeles)**

Arizona would've been in the West region if they had moved up to the 1 line, so
it probably doesn't make that much of a difference that they're a 2. Off to L.A.
they go. "S-Curve" advocates would be happy that the best 2 would be paired with
the worst 1.

<a name='latest'></a>
*Reload for the latest updates*

**6. Duke - East (Syracuse)**

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-conversation="none" lang="en"><p><a
href="https://twitter.com/NicoleAuerbach">@nicoleauerbach</a> Would be so much
more interesting if Duke loses tonight and they&#39;re sent to Kentucky&#39;s
region. Conspiracy theorist&#39;s dream!</p>&mdash; Crashing the Dance
(@crashthedance) <a
href="https://twitter.com/crashthedance/status/576569425899495424">March 14,
2015</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

This is where things start to get interesting, and where "natural regions"
becomes a little hazy. Durham is closer to Cleveland than to Syracuse, but
"Midwest" isn't the first thing that comes to mind when thinking about ACC
teams, their most recent tournament champ aside.

So, does 100 extra miles trump regional sensibilities? We'll assume the
committee agrees that North Carolina is not in the Midwest and send Duke to
Syracuse. Conspiracy theorists will have to wait, unless they think that
Virginia was sent west so Duke could stay closer to home.

**7. Iowa St.**

**8. Kansas**

**9. Gonzaga**

**10.  Notre Dame**

**11.  Oklahoma**

**12.  Baylor**

**13.  Maryland**

**14.  North Carolina**

**15.  Arkansas**

**16.  SMU**


