---
layout: post
title: 'Mocking the Bracket'
date: '2016-03-13 13:00:00 -0500'
basename: mocking_the_bracket
---
**Click [here](#latest) for the latest update.**

Each year for the better part of the last decade, the NCAA has invited a group of media
and other folks to Indianapolis to participate in a mock selection committee
meeting and report the details of the sausage factory to the masses.

And each year, there is still much public confusion about the process,
despite the NCAA's best efforts (and pretty thorough description of the
[process](http://i.turner.ncaa.com/dr/ncaa/ncaa7/release/sites/default/files/images/2015/02/16/2014-15_principles_and_procedures.pdf)).
Yes, they leave some parts of the procedure open to interpretation
(How do they define "best teams" for at-large selection? Is a team's "natural
area of interest" the closest absolute site, or their most sensible geographic
region?), but the process itself is well defined.

While the [selection](http://crashingthedance.com/selection) and
[seeding](http://crashingthedance.com/seeding) steps that Crashing the Dance
tries to forecast using machine learning are highly subjective, the bracketing
step is essentially an algorithm based on the 1-68 seed list and the bracketing
rules and principles.

So, I'm going to once again do my part to help y'all understand, as much as I
understand it anyway, how the committee does its job when taking the 1-68 list
and placing each team into the bracket.

First, let's identify which teams are prohibited from certain sites based on
committee criteria.

> A team will not be permitted to play in any facility in which it has played
> more than three games during its season, not including exhibitions and
> conference post-season tournaments.

Villanova played only three games at the Wells Fargo Center, the site of the
East Regional, so they are not prohibited from being placed there.

> A host institution’s team shall not be permitted to play at the site where the
> institution is hosting. However, the team may play on the same days when the
> institution is hosting.

In addition to those criteria, BYU does not play on Sunday for religious
reasons, so they cannot be assigned to a pod or region with Sunday games
scheduled. (They're not currently projected in the field, so this likely won't
come into play.)

<a name='pod-prohibitions'></a>

Pod site prohibitions (not comprehensive)
-----------------------------------------
**Providence** - Providence

**Des Moines** - Iowa State

**Raleigh** - North Carolina State

**Denver** - None

**Brooklyn** - None

**St. Louis** - None

**Oklahoma City** - None

**Spokane** - Idaho

<a name='region-prohibitions'></a>

Region site prohibitions (not comprehensive)
-----------------------------------------
**Anaheim** - None

**Louisville** - Louisville (ineligible)

**Chicago** - None

**Philadelphia** - LaSalle

Remember, this is not my opinion of how the bracket will look at 5:30 p.m. on
Selection Sunday. It is an exercise in placing teams in the bracket based on the
latest 1-68 seed list generated by the [CTD seeding model](https://crashingthedance.com/seeding)
(as of 1 p.m. ET Sunday).

> The committee will place the four No. 1 seeded teams 1 through 4 in each of
> the four regions, thus determining the Final Four semifinals pairings (overall
> 1 vs. 4; 2 vs. 3).

The main principle when placing teams into the bracket is:

> Teams will remain in or as close to their areas of natural interest as
> possible. A team moved out of its natural area will be placed in the next
> closest region to the extent possible. If two teams from the same natural
> region are in contention for the same bracket position, the team ranked higher
> in the seed list shall remain in its natural region.

There is some debate over what a team's "natural region" is for the purposes of
bracketing the field. It is generally a balance between distance to each site,
"fit" (Kentucky was sent to Atlanta over closer St. Louis in 2012 because it was
[deemed a better fit](http://espn.go.com/mens-college-basketball/tournament/2012/story/_/id/7674260/men-ncaa-tournament-2012-selection-committee-did-best-keep-teams-home)), and other factors. We'll consider each application as it comes up.

As usual, I'll be using the super handy
[CTD distance chart](http://crashingthedance.com/distance) to find the closest site.
Regardless of how the criteria is applied, the NCAA has made very clear that
geography trumps just about everything when it comes to building the bracket.

Let's go.

**1. Kansas - Midwest (Chicago)**

Kansas is the consensus #1 overall, and the CTD seeding model agrees. Lawrence
is slightly closer to Chicago than to Louisville, and the Midwest is more the
Jayhawk's natural region than is the South.

**2. Virginia - East (Philadelphia)**

Easy answer by natural region and distance.

**3. North Carolina - South (Louisville)**

The closest site for the Heels would be Philly, but Louisville is only slightly
farther.

**4. Villanova - West (Anaheim)**

Staying on the #1 line would be worse for Villanova's travel plans than falling
to the #2 line. The only slot left is in California.

> The committee will then place the No. 2 seeds in each region in true seed
list order.

One significant procedural change is [new this
year](http://www.ncaa.com/news/basketball-men/article/2015-07-20/ncaa-adjusts-process-selecting-first-four-participants):

> The committee may relax the principle of keeping teams as close to
their area of natural interest for seeding teams on the No. 2 line to avoid,
for example, the overall No. 5 seed being sent to the same region as the
overall No. 1 seed. The committee will not compromise the principle of
keeping teams from the same conference in separate regions.

**5. Michigan State - South (Louisville)**

Regardless of whether Michigan State rises to the 1 seed line in real bracket
land, they won't end up in Chicago with overall #1 Kansas already there. In this
case, they're sent to the next closest site paired with overall #3 and
tournament nemesis North Carolina.

**6. Oregon - West (Anaheim)**

The Ducks get their preferred region.

**7. Oklahoma - East (Philadelphia)**

Chicago is off limits because fellow Big 12 mate Kansas is already there, and
Louisville is already taken by Michigan State.

**8. Utah - Midwest (Chicago)**

The only site left goes to Utah, and it works better from a bracket balancing
standpoint matching the #1 overall with the #8 overall.

> The committee will then place the No. 3 seeds in each region in true seed list order.

> Each of the first four teams selected from a conference shall be placed in
> different regions if they are seeded on the first four lines.

**9. Miami - Midwest (Chicago)**

Louisville and Philly are closer, but both already taken by ACC teams.

**10. West Virginia - South (Louisville)**

Oklahoma is in Philly, so the Mountaineers make the trip to Louisville.

**11. Xavier - East (Philadelphia)**

Xavier would prefer to make the short drive to Louisville, but West Virginia
just snatched it. Chicago is also taken, so the second-best Big East team heads
east.

**12. Kentucky - West (Anaheim)**

SEC champ Kentucky gets the final spot on the 3 line.

<a name='latest'></a>
*Reload for the latest updates*

> The committee will then place the No. 4 seeds in each region in true seed list order.

**13. Texas A&M - South (Louisville)**

The closest (and natural region) site is available for the Aggies.

**14. Purdue - Midwest (Chicago)**

In the mock scenario, the Boilermakers have to be pretty happy with this turn of
events, aside from being in the same region as overall #1 Kansas.

**15. Indiana - West (Anaheim)**

Oh, what a difference a single seed makes. Instead of staying near Bloomington,
the Hoosiers get shipped out west. There were no conflicts to putting Indiana in
Philadelphia, but they were moved here because putting Arizona in Anaheim would
have caused a conference conflict, with Oregon already there. The committee has
the ability to make these kinds of switches further down the seed list.

**16. Arizona - East (Philadelphia)**

Arizona also has to travel across the country, but in the opposite direction.
As mentioned above, the Wildcats could not have been in Anaheim because Oregon
was already there.

> After the top four seed lines have been
> assigned, the committee will review the
> relative strengths of the regions by adding the
> “true seed” numbers in each region to
> determine if any severe numerical
> imbalance exists. Generally, no more than
> five points should separate the lowest and
> highest total.

We're on the fringe of imbalance, but for purposes of time, we'll let it slide.
Hopefully the committee won't use that excuse! South (31), Midwest (32),
East (36), and West (37) are within six points.

