---
layout: post
title: 'Mocking the Bracket'
date: '2017-03-12 13:00:00 -0500'
basename: mocking_the_bracket
---
**Click [here](#latest) for the latest update.**

Each year for the better part of the last decade, the NCAA has invited a group of media
and other folks to Indianapolis to participate in a mock selection committee
meeting and report the details of the sausage factory to the masses.

The NCAA tried to pull back the curtain a bit with the [early release of a top 16
seed list and "bracket"](http://www.ncaa.com/news/basketball-men/bracket-beat/2017-02-11/march-madness-top-16-seeds-revealed-first-ever-season), but despite their best efforts (and pretty thorough description of the
[process](http://i.turner.ncaa.com/sites/default/files/images/2017/02/03/2016-17_principles_and_procedures.pdf) there is still much public confusion about the process.
Yes, they leave some parts of the procedure open to interpretation
(How do they define "best teams" for at-large selection? Is a team's "natural
area of interest" the closest absolute site, or their most sensible geographic
region?), but the process itself is well defined.

While the [selection](https://crashingthedance.com/selection) and
[seeding](https://crashingthedance.com/seeding) steps that Crashing the Dance
tries to forecast using machine learning are highly subjective, the bracketing
step is essentially an algorithm based on the 1-68 seed list and the bracketing
rules and principles.

So, I'm going to once again do my part to help y'all understand, as much as I
understand it anyway, how the committee does its job when taking the 1-68 list
and placing each team into the bracket.

First, let's identify which teams are prohibited from certain sites based on
committee criteria.

> A team will not be permitted to play in any facility in which it has played
> more than three games during its season, not including exhibitions and
> conference post-season tournaments.

Kansas played three games at Sprint Center in Kansas City, so they are allowed
to play in the Midwest Region. No other team projected in the field played
more than two games at any other site.

> A host institution’s team shall not be permitted to play at the site where the
> institution is hosting. However, the team may play on the same days when the
> institution is hosting.

In addition to those criteria, BYU does not play on Sunday for religious
reasons, so they cannot be assigned to a pod or region with Sunday games
scheduled. (They're not currently projected in the field, so this likely won't
come into play.)

<a name='pod-prohibitions'></a>

Pod site prohibitions (not comprehensive)
-----------------------------------------
**Buffalo** - None

**Milwaukee** - Marquette

**Orlando** - UCF, Stetson

**Salt Lake City** - Utah

**Greenville, SC** - None

**Indianapolis** - IUPUI

**Tulsa** - Tulsa

**Sacramento** - CSU Sacramento

<a name='region-prohibitions'></a>

Region site prohibitions (not comprehensive)
-----------------------------------------
**Kansas City** - None

**San Jose** - None

**Memphis** - Memphis

**New York** - St. John's

Remember, this is not my opinion of how the bracket will look at 5:30 p.m. on
Selection Sunday. It is an exercise in placing teams in the bracket based on the
latest 1-68 seed list generated by the [CTD seeding model](https://crashingthedance.com/seeding)
(as of 1 p.m. ET Sunday).

> The committee will place the four No. 1 seeded teams 1 through 4 in each of
> the four regions, thus determining the Final Four semifinals pairings (overall
> 1 vs. 4; 2 vs. 3).

The main principle when placing teams into the bracket is:

> Teams will remain in or as close to their areas of natural interest as
> possible. A team moved out of its natural area will be placed in the next
> closest region to the extent possible. If two teams from the same natural
> region are in contention for the same bracket position, the team ranked higher
> in the seed list shall remain in its natural region.

There is some debate over what a team's "natural region" is for the purposes of
bracketing the field. It is generally a balance between distance to each site,
"fit" (Kentucky was sent to Atlanta over closer St. Louis in 2012 because it was
[deemed a better fit](http://espn.go.com/mens-college-basketball/tournament/2012/story/_/id/7674260/men-ncaa-tournament-2012-selection-committee-did-best-keep-teams-home)), and other factors. We'll consider each application as it comes up.

As usual, I'll be using the super handy
[CTD distance chart](https://crashingthedance.com/distance) to find the closest site.
Regardless of how the criteria is applied, the NCAA has made very clear that
geography trumps just about everything when it comes to building the bracket.

Let's go.

**1. Villanova - East (Buffalo)**

Big East Champ and defending national champs Villanova is the consensus #1
overall, and the [CTD seeding model](https://crashingthedance.com/seeding) agrees.
The geography is straightforward as well, with the [nearest pod and region sites](https://crashingthedance.com/distance)
a short trip from Philadelphia.

**2. Kansas - Midwest (Milwaukee)**

(Edit: Tulsa is closer than either Milwaukee or Indy.)

Despite their early loss in the Big 12 tournament, Kansas still grabs a 1 seed.
Kansas City and Tulsa are the clear site choices.

**3. Gonzaga - West (Salt Lake City)**

While there is still some debate about Gonzaga's place on the seed line, the CTD
model had little debate about their place on the [seed list](https://crashingthedance.com/seeding). As the only CTD 1 seed in the West, they'll get their preferred site placement.

**4. North Carolina - South (Greenville)**

The Heels tenuously hold on to the last spot on the #1 seed line. Memphis is a
little farther from Chapel Hill than New York, but the South is arguably their
natural region. Greenville is filling in for Greensboro as a pod site, but it's
still the closest.

> The committee will then place the No. 2 seeds in each region in true seed
list order.

**5. Kentucky - South (Indianapolis)**

Memphis is the closest regional site. With the lowest 1 seed in Memphis,
there would not be any bracket balance issues adding the highest 2 seed.

**6. Oregon - West (Sacramento)**

Despite losing in the Pac 12 championship game, the Ducks remain the highest seed
from the conference and are rewarded geographically.

**7. Duke - East (Greenville)**

Duke's late run lifted them to a higher seed line than would have been
expected several weeks ago. They're also rewarded geographically, though being
in the same region as Villanova might not be a reward.

**8. Arizona - Midwest (Salt Lake City)**

The only region left is Kansas City, but the Pac 12 tournament champs get their
closest pod site.

> The committee will then place the No. 3 seeds in each region in true seed list order.

> Each of the first four teams selected from a conference shall be placed in
> different regions if they are seeded on the first four lines.

**9. Florida St. - Midwest (Orlando)**

With North Carolina already assigned to Memphis, the Seminoles can't get their
preferred geographic region. However, they do get to stay close to home for the
first round.

**10. Louisville - West (Indianapolis)**

As the fourth team in the field from the ACC, the Cardinals are left with
the geographic leftovers.

<a name='latest'></a>
*Reload for the latest updates*
